#summary Auxiliary tools used by `tei2html`.

= Introduction =

Besides the main XSLT scripts, `tei2html` includes a number of Perl scripts to accomplish various tasks. Many of these are quick hacks to get things done.

== `tei2html.pl` ==

The main 'glue' script. This will run the various commands to actually run the `tei2html` XSLT scripts.

|| *Option* || *Action* ||
|| `-x` || Convert SGML file to XML ||
|| `-h` || Generate HTML ||
|| `-e` || Generate ePub ||
|| `-t` || Generate plain vanilla ASCII (_needs manual cleanup!_) ||
|| `-p` || Generate PDF (_using Prince XML_) ||
|| `-c` filename || Include additional CSS file ||


== `ucwords.pl` ==

Perl script to list word-frequencies in an XML file. This script will recognize the `@lang` tag, and write a word-frequency list per language encountered. Words in the output will be color-coded, based on frequency and appearance in a spell-check dictionary.

== `fixpb.pl` ==

Perl script to fix page numbers, as recorded in the `@n` attribute in `<pb>` elements.

Syntax:

`perl -S fixpb.pl _filename_ _start_ _offset_`

_filename_: the file of which the page numbers need to be updated

_start_: the first page number that needs to be updated.

_offset_: the offset to be applied to pages after _start_; can be a positive or negative integer.

== `catpars.pl` ==

Perl script to unwrap paragraphs, such that they appear on one line. Handle with care!

== `quotes.pl` ==

Perl script to replace ASCII double-quotes with curly quotes. May need some manual verification and correction where quotes and tags interfere with the simple algorithm used.

== `pgpp.pl` ==

Initials script run on the output from PG Distributed Proofreaders, when converting that to TEI (A manual process).