#summary How to encode cross-references.

= Internal Cross References =

Internal cross-references are to be encoded using the `<ref>` element, with the `@target` attribute carrying the id of the target element referenced to.

== Special types of references ==

*Footnotes:* Sometimes footnotes markers appear multiple times on a page, each referring to the same note. When these are encoded as follows:

`<ref target="n123.1" type="noteref">1</note>`

They will be rendered as a superscript number with the actual number replacing the content.

*Page numbers:* When a reference is made to a pagenumber, you can encode these as follows:

`See page <ref target="pb123" type="pageref">123</note> for details.`

When this is rendered on page media, the content will be replaced with the actual page number of the page the reference appears on.

= External Cross References =

External cross-references are to be encoded using the `<xref>` element, with the `@url` attribute carrying the url of the resource referenced.

== Shorthand notations ==

*Project Gutenberg text:* Use `pg:<`_ebook number_`>` as url.

This will link to the catalog page of the given book on [http://www.gutenberg.org Project Gutenberg].

*!WorldCat catalog page:* Use `oclc:<`_number_`>` as url.

*Open Library catalog page:* Use `oln:<`_number_`>` as url (when referring tot the published edition used as source).

*Open Library catalog page:* Use `olw:<`_number_`>` as url (when referring to the abstract 'work').

*!WikiPedia article:* Use `wp:<`_title_`>` as url.

*Bible citation:* Use `bib:<`_book chapter:verse_`>` as url.

This will link to a page at the [http://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=job%201:21&version=NIV BibleGateway] in the same language as the text. Alternatively, it could use the [http://skepticsannotatedbible.com/job/1.html#21 Skeptics Annotated Bible].

= External Link Locations =

Depending on the output format and configuration, the external links can be handled in different ways. In some output formats (print paper) hyperlinks do not work, in others (ePub) they may or may not work, depending on the reader being used. In that case it might be desirable to collect all external references in an appendix, and present the full URL, so they can be accessed manually if so desired.

== A generated section with external links ==

Feature: 

  * Collect all external links in a table.
  * Show the link URL in this table, and make it active if technically possible.
  * From each original link, link from the original link to the location in the table.
  * From each entry in the table, link to the location of the original link.