
## Support for mathematical formulas

(Future feature for `tei2html`)

### Requirements

Use the suggested TEI notation: `<formula id=f1 notation="TeX">$$E = mc^2$$</formula>` (see [TEI guidelines](http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/FT.html#FTFOR))

* Meet Project Gutenberg rules, that is convert to HTML and ePub without any dynamic content (that is, no javascript, no external fonts or dependencies on non-standard software, etc.)
* Look as good as normal (dynamic) MathJax output.
* Fully automated processing on command line (that is, it can be integrated in a build process)

### Implementation

The Project Gutenberg prohibition on active content make the direct use of MathJax impossible, so we need to follow a more complicated way to include mathematical formulas in text intended for PG.

The process consists of three steps:

1. Use XSLT to export all formulas into separate files. This is done during normal processing.
2. Use a tool to convert all these files to SVG files (Perl, node.js, etc)
3. Use XSLT to include the SVG files as images (or inline) in the resulting file.

The resulting output files are placed in a folder `formulas`, and named according to the following naming scheme `(inline|display)-<ID>.tex`.

The script `convertFormulas.pl` will convert these files to files named `(inline|display)-<ID>.svg`. This script will use node.js with mathjax-node-cli to produce Html, SVG, and MathML files from the exported formulas.

### Configuration.

The following configuration options have been added:

* `math.mathJax.enable` if set to true, the MathJax JavaScript is dynamically loaded, and used to render math on-the-fly. If set to false, no JavaScript is loaded, and an `img` tag with a reference to an .SVG file is produced instead.
* `math.mathJax.configuration` determines the MathJax configuration to use.
* `math.mathJax.format` set to the format to be used. The following formats will be supported: `MML`: MathML (inline); `SVG`: SVG (inline); `SVG+IMG` SVG (in separate files, included as images).

Change to:

* `math.mathJax.method` Way mathJax is used to generate math. Possible values:
  * `MathJax`: use MathJax dynamically (loading javascript libraries)
  * `MML`: use inline MathML notation (generated by mathjax-node-cli)
  * `SVG`: use inline SVG (generated by mathjax-node-cli)
  * `SVG+IMG`: use SVG files, included using an HTML `img` tag.


### Installation of tools

1. install [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/). Make sure to install both node.js and npm.
2. install [Mathjax-node](https://github.com/mathjax/mathjax-node) using `npm install -g mathjax-node`.
3. install [Mathjax-node-cli](https://github.com/mathjax/mathjax-node-cli) using `npm install -g mathjax-node-cli`.

### Issues

Fetching the baseline seems difficult, see:

1. https://tex.stackexchange.com/questions/44486/pixel-perfect-vertical-alignment-of-image-rendered-tex-snippets/45621
2. https://www.princexml.com/forum/topic/2971/using-mathjax-with-princexml

The baseline is stored in the SVG files generated by MathJax. They can be read from the SVG file, using Xpath `/svg/@style`, and then parsing the CSS value `vertical-align`.

The spoken expansion is also encoded in the MathJax generated SVG file, using Xpath, `/svg/title`.

