#summary Installation instructions.

= Required Downloads =

The `tei2html` code has a range of dependencies on third-party software. This page lists those.

== Saxon ==

An XSLT 2.0 processor is required for tei2html, any XSLT 2.0 processor should work, however, I've developed these stylesheets with Saxon.

You should download a reasonable recent version of Saxon. For example the Saxon SA product from [http://www.saxonica.com/products.html saxonica.com].

The perl scripts assume that saxon9he.jar is placed in the tools/lib/ subdirectory.

== Java ==

Saxon requires Java.

Make sure that the java executables can be found on the path.

If you do not have Java, you can download it from http://java.com/en/

== Perl ==

If you are using the provided Perl scripts to glue things together, 
you'll need a Perl interpreter, and it will have to work together with the !PerlMagick extension. To make
this work, you'll need to install matching versions of both.

=== Perl 5.10 ===

My advise is to download [http://www.activestate.com/activeperl/ ActivePerl]. For Windows, use [http://downloads.activestate.com/ActivePerl/Windows/5.10/ActivePerl-5.10.0.1004-MSWin32-x86-287188.msi Perl 5.10, build 1004.] (Also on Vista x64, as the x64 version of Perl is not yet compatible with !ImageMagick.)

After installing Perl, install [http://www.imagemagick.org/script/index.php ImageMagick]. On Windows, use [http://www.imagemagick.org/download/binaries/ImageMagick-6.5.0-5-Q16-windows-dll.exe ImageMagick 6.5.0], 16 bits dynamically linked version. Don't forget to check !PerlMagick installation during the set-up.

=== Perl 5.14 ===

PS. Also works with Perl 5.14.2.1402 and !ImageMagick-6.7.7-5-Q16-windows-dll, and got it to work after moving the !ImageMagick dlls to a location on the path.

=== Perl 5.18 ===


=== Packages used ===

== SX, NSGML ==

_optional, only needed you use SGML, not when using XML only_

SX is an SGML to XML translator, and NSGML is an SGML validator, part of the SP package. Since the tools still support SGML, you will need both those two tools. They can be downloaded from [http://www.jclark.com/ James Clark website]. For windows, get [ftp://ftp.jclark.com/pub/sp/win32/sp1_3_4.zip sp 1.3.4].

For use with SX and NSGML you need to configure a catalog of DTDs (Which maps public DTDs to local resources containing their definitions). The scripts assume this is located in a file named tools/pubtext/CATALOG. 

A short explanation of Catalog files can be found in the SP documentation on James Clark's website references above.

== ZIP ==

To compress ePub files, you will need a zip utility. `tei2html` uses [http://www.info-zip.org/Zip.html info-zip] to handle the peculiar requirements of the ePub format. (See e.g. [http://www.snee.com/bobdc.blog/2008/03/creating-epub-files.html this blog entry on creating ePub files].)

== Patc ==

_optional, only needed when you use the transcription schemes I use in SGML_ 

Patc (pattern changer) is a small utility in C to do multiple find-and-replace actions at once. You will need a C compiler to get it to work. It enables you to execute multiple find-replace actions in an efficient way. Mostly used to change the transliteration of non-Roman scripts I've used. If you don't use that, you'll not need it. (I've successfully compiled this on a variety of platforms, including Unix, and Windows; a solution file for Visual Studio 7.0 is included; contact me if you need a Windows binary.)

== epubcheck ==

_optional, only needed if you want to check generated ePubs_ 

Epubcheck is a tool to validate epub books, it can be obtained from: http://code.google.com/p/epubcheck/

This tool also requires Java; the scripts assume you use epubcheck-3.0.1.jar, placed in the tools/lib subdirectory.