#summary Instructions on how to use the @rend attribute

= Using the `@rend` attribute =

The `@rend` attribute is a simple hook into the TEI structure to document or specify rendering features. Within `tei2html` they can be used to achieve certain formatting effects. This feature should be used with moderation. A number of different ways of using the `@rend` attribute can be distinguished.

== Simple ==

Simple rendering attribute values provide single keywords to provide a rendering hint. This type of usage is sufficient 95 percent of the time. The available rendering keywords are element specific, and should be considered as hints only, that is, ignoring the rend attribute should not render the document illegible.

|| *Element* || *Recognized `@rend` values* ||
|| `hi`      || italic (_default_) bold sc sup sub ex ||
|| `figure`  || center (_default_) left right inline ||
|| `p`       || block center left (_default_) right indent noindent ||
|| `q`       || block ||
|| `list`    || number bullet none (_default_) ||

== Rendition Ladders ==

A slightly more powerful mechanism is provided by so called 'rendering ladders', in which a number of key-value pairs are provided. These take the form `key(value)`, and multiple can be present in a `@rend` attribute. They are either translated to CSS, or given a specific meaning, sometimes depending on the element they are applied to.

=== CSS equivalents ===

In most cases, rendition ladders are one-on-one translated to equivalent CSS rules. For example, the following snippet of TEI:

{{{
<p rend="font-style(italic)text-align(left)">A left-aligned paragraph in italics.</p>
}}}

Will be translated to the following HTML:

{{{
<p class="x12345">A left-aligned paragraph in italics.
}}}

And the following CSS rule:

{{{
.x12345 { font-style: italic; text-align: left; }
}}}

Note that if the same value for the `@rend` attribute is used multiple times, only one CSS rule will be generated matching all occurrences (and the same class attribute will be used on each of them).

=== Special interpretations ===

In a number of places, rendition ladders are interpreted by `tei2html` directly.

The following keys and values are supported: (Note that this list is not exhaustive, and the full list of options will be indicated with each element.)

|| *Element* || *Key* || *Value* || *Example* ||
|| `text` || `stylesheet` || name of CSS stylesheet || `style/classic.css` ||
|| _Any_ || `font` || `italic`, `bold`, `fsc` (full caps and smallcaps), `smallcaps`, `underlined`, `gothic` (note the difference from fall-through CSS) || `<hi rend="font(bold)">` ||
|| `p`, `q` || `align` || `right`, `left`, `center`, `block` (that is, justified) || `<p rend="align(block)">` ||
|| `p`, `l` || `indent` || The number characters to indent. The size of a character is not fixed, but is roughly the size of the letter m. || `<l rend="indent(2)">` ||
|| _Any_ || `link`   || any url, rendered as link to the indicated url. || `<figure rend="link(images/a.jpg)">` ||
|| `figure`, `head`, `cell` || `image`  || any url, rendered as in-line image, obtained from the indicated url. When used on a `head` element, the image appears above the head, when used on a `cell` element, the image appears in the table-cell (typically used to pull in large braces spanning cells). || `<figure rend="image(images/a.jpg)">` ||
|| `figure` || `float`  || The place to float in image, table, etc. Possible values: left, right. || `<figure rend="float(left)">` ||
|| `table`, `list` || `columns` || Set the element in multiple columns. May be applied to tables and lists. ||  `<list rend="columns(2)">...</list>` ||
|| _Any_ || `class` || Sets a class attribute in the corresponding HTML output. This can be used in combination with custom CSS stylesheets to achieve special effects. || `<p rend="class(myClass)">` ||