<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><title>Main Title of Work Goes Here</title><meta http-equiv="content-type" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/><meta name="generator" content="tei2html.xsl, see http://code.google.com/p/tei2html/"/><meta name="author" content="Author of Work (Birth-year—Death-year) A. U. Thor W. Riter"/><link rel="coverpage" href="images/cover500.jpg"/><link rel="schema.DC" href="http://dublincore.org/documents/1998/09/dces/"/><meta name="DC.Creator" content="Author of Work (Birth-year—Death-year) A. U. Thor W. Riter"/><meta name="DC.Title" content="Main Title of Work Goes Here"/><meta name="DC.Date" content="2009-12-13"/><meta name="DC.Language" content="en-US"/><meta name="DC.Format" content="text/html"/><meta name="DC.Publisher" content="Project Gutenberg"/><meta name="DC.Rights" content="This book is not copyrighted in the United States. If you live elsewhere please check the laws of your country before downloading this book."/><meta name="DC.Identifier" content="http://www.gutenberg.org/etext/123456789"/><link href="test.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/></head><body><div class="body"><div id="ch6" class="div1"><div class="divHead"><h2 id="xd25e993" class="main">Tests of poetry</h2></div><div class="divBody"><p id="xd25e995" class="first">This section is to test the rendering of poetry by the TEI stylesheet. The entire poem should appear centered, with all stanza's aligned. Note that the technique used to center an entire block of text does not work in IE.</p><div id="xd25e997" class="lgouter "><h4 class="xd25e998">Three stanzas in a row</h4><div id="xd25e1000" class="lg "><p id="xd25e1001" class="line ">This is a rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1003" class="line xd25e1003">This is another <a id="xd25e1005"/>rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1007" class="line ">This is a rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1009" class="line xd25e1009">This is another rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1011" class="line ">This is a rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1013" class="line xd25e1013">This is another rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1015" class="line ">This is a rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1017" class="line xd25e1017">This is another rule of verse</p></div><div id="xd25e1019" class="lg xd25e1019"><p id="xd25e1020" class="line ">This is a rule of verse in italics</p><p id="xd25e1022" class="line xd25e1003">This is another rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1024" class="line ">This is a rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1026" class="line xd25e1009">This is another rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1028" class="line ">This is a rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1030" class="line xd25e1013">This is another rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1032" class="line ">This is a rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1034" class="line xd25e1017">This is another rule of verse</p></div><div id="xd25e1036" class="lg xd25e1019"><p id="xd25e1037" class="line "><span class="linenum">1</span>This is a rule of verse in italics</p><p id="xd25e1039" class="line xd25e1003"><span class="linenum">2</span>This is another rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1041" class="line "><span class="linenum">3</span>This is a rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1043" class="line xd25e1003"><span class="linenum">4</span>This is <span class="corr" id="xd25e1045" title="Source: Correction in verse">another</span> rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1048" class="line "><span class="linenum">5</span>This is a rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1050" class="line xd25e1003"><span class="linenum">6</span>This is another rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1052" class="line "><span class="linenum">7</span>This is a rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1054" class="line xd25e1017"><span class="linenum">8</span>This is another rule of verse<a class="noteref" id="xd25e1056src" href="test-ch6.xhtml#xd25e1056">1</a></p></div></div><div id="xd25e1071" class="blockquote"><p id="xd25e1072" class="first hangq">‘Test of hanging punctuation. Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim veniam, quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo consequat. Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit esse cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur. Excepteur sint occaecat cupidatat non proident, sunt in culpa qui officia deserunt mollit anim id est laborum.’</p>

<p id="xd25e1075" class="hangqq">“Test of hanging punctuation. Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim veniam, quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo consequat. Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit esse cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur. Excepteur sint occaecat cupidatat non proident, sunt in culpa qui officia deserunt mollit anim id est laborum.”</p>

<p id="xd25e1078" class="hangqqq">‘“Test of hanging punctuation. Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim veniam, quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo consequat. Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit esse cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur. Excepteur sint occaecat cupidatat non proident, sunt in culpa qui officia deserunt mollit anim id est laborum.”’</p></div><p id="xd25e1080">Note that the <a id="xd25e1082"/>footnote includes some verse, to which we can link <a href="test-ch6.xhtml#footnoteverse" id="xd25e1084">here</a>, and elsewhere in the document.</p><p id="xd25e1087">Another piece of verse with line-numbers:</p><div id="xd25e1089" class="lgouter xd25e1019"><p id="xd25e1090" class="line "><span class="linenum">1</span>This is a rule of verse in italics</p><p id="xd25e1092" class="line xd25e1003"><span class="linenum">2</span>This is another rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1094" class="line "><span class="linenum">3</span>This is a rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1096" class="line xd25e1003"><span class="linenum">4</span>This is <span class="corr" id="xd25e1098" title="Source: Correction in verse">another</span> rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1101" class="line "><span class="linenum">5</span>This is a rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1103" class="line xd25e1003"><span class="linenum">6</span>This is another rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1105" class="line "><span class="linenum">7</span>This is a rule of verse</p><p id="xd25e1107" class="line xd25e1017"><span class="linenum">8</span>This is another rule of verse</p></div><p id="xd25e1109" class="first">Two verses, aligned:</p><table class="alignedverse"><tr><td class="linenumbers"/><td class="first"><span class="h4">Frère Jacques</span></td><td class="second"><span class="h4">Brother John</span></td></tr><tr><td class="linenumbers"><span class="linenum">1</span></td><td class="first"><p id="xd25e1114" class="line ">Frère Jacques, frère Jacques,</p></td><td class="second"><p id="xd25e1125" class="line ">Are you sleeping, are you sleeping,</p></td></tr><tr><td class="linenumbers"><span class="linenum">2</span></td><td class="first"><p id="xd25e1116" class="line ">Dormez-vous ? Dormez-vous ?</p></td><td class="second"><p id="xd25e1127" class="line ">Brother John? Brother John?</p></td></tr><tr><td class="linenumbers"/><td class="first"><p id="xd25e1118" class="line ">Sonnez les matines ! Sonnez les matines !</p></td><td class="second"><p id="xd25e1129" class="line ">Morning bells are ringing! Morning bells are ringing!</p></td></tr><tr><td class="linenumbers"><span class="linenum">4</span></td><td class="first"><p id="xd25e1120" class="line xd25e1009">Ding, daing, dong. Ding, daing, dong.</p></td><td class="second"><p id="xd25e1131" class="line xd25e1009">Ding, dang, dong. Ding, dang, dong.</p></td></tr></table></div><div class="footnotes"><hr class="fnsep"/><p class="footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref" id="xd25e1056" href="test-ch6.xhtml#xd25e1056src">1</a></span> To add verse in a <a id="xd25e1059"/>footnote, the lg element needs to be enclosed with a q element. This is a requirement of the TEI DTD.</p><div class="body" id="xd25e1064"><div id="xd25e1065" class="div1"><div class="divHead"><div id="footnoteverse" class="lgouter footnote xd25e1019"><p id="xd25e1067" class="line ">This is a rule of verse in italics in a footnote</p><p id="xd25e1069" class="line xd25e1003">This is another rule of verse in a footnote</p></div></div></div></div></div></div></div></body></html>